[hipblaslt] Runtime PCI chip ID predicate (#3924)
ROCm/rocm-libraries: projects/hipblaslt/docs/conceptual/pci-chip-id-predicates-walkthrough.rst

.. meta::
   :description: Predicate selection walkthrough for the hipBLASLt library
   :keywords: hipBLASLt, ROCm, library, runtime, predicate, selection

.. _predicate-selection-walkthrough:

*********************************************

> PCI Chip ID Predicates - A Walkthrough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PCI chip ID predicates walkthrough
```

*********************************************

> Predicates are one of the essential integration points between the tensilelite build system, and the hipBLASLt library runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Predicates are one of the essential integration points between the TensileLite build system and the hipBLASLt library runtime.
```

Author: This isn't standard capitalization, is there precedent elsewhere you're trying to make this consistent with?

Predicates are built into master solution libraries, files that contain information about which kernels are available, 

> and their location. These files are loaded at runtime, and used in the kernel selection process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Predicates are built into master solution libraries, files that contain information about which kernels are available 
and their location. These files are loaded at runtime and used in the kernel selection process.
```

> Chip ID Registry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chip ID registry
```

-----------------------

> The chip ID registry is a namespace in `Tensile/AMDGPUPredicates.hpp <../../tensilelite/include/Tensile/AMDGPUPredicates.hpp>` that

Reviewer: Best to use a full link to the GitHub file with the underscore here because the built HTML files will be in a different place.

contains the official mapping of supported PCI chip IDs and their fallback relationships.

.. code-block:: yaml

    - {PCIChipId: 0x75a3, DeviceName: AMD Instinct MI355X}
    - {PCIChipId: 0x75a2, DeviceName: AMD Instinct MI355X}

Hardware predicates
-----------------------

> Hardware predicates are the most coarse grained predicates. They are used to qualify, or reject, a kernel based on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hardware predicates are the most coarse-grained predicates. They are used to qualify, or reject, a kernel based on
```

attributes that can be determined at runtime through system inspection. These include the processor type (e.g. gfx1201),

> the compute-unit counter (e.g., 128), and as of https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/pull/3924, the PCI chip ID (e.g., 0x7890).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attributes that can be determined at runtime through system inspection. These include the processor type (for example, gfx1201),
the compute-unit counter (for example, 128), and, as of `<https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/pull/3924>`_, the PCI chip ID (for example, 0x7890).
```

> **Building of Hardware Predicates**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building hardware predicates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Reviewer: Suggest making this into a level-3 heading for ease of navigation via the sidebar (this is optional)

> The source of truth for hardware predicates is in the hipblaslt library logic (LL) files (``find . -name Logic``). In particular, as of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source of truth for hardware predicates is in the hipBLASLt library logic (LL) files (``find . -name Logic``). In particular, as of 
```

> `tensilelite version 5.0.0 <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/273fcdc27e2f37d81420929d2105649494c9bb9d/projects/hipblaslt/tensilelite/Tensile/__init__.py>`_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TensileLite version 5.0.0 <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/273fcdc27e2f37d81420929d2105649494c9bb9d/projects/hipblaslt/tensilelite/Tensile/__init__.py>`_,
```

Author: Same as above

> the standard 4-statement metadata at the top of each LL is authoritative (some LLs may have fields omitted for backwards compatibility):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the standard four-statement metadata at the top of each LL is authoritative (some LLs could have fields omitted for backwards compatibility):
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    - {MinimumRequiredVersion: 5.0.0}
    - gfx950
    - {Architecture: gfx950, CUCount: 64}
    - [Device 75a3, Device 75a2]

> In the tensilelite build system, the PCI chip ID is add as an `Or`-style predicate, to allow multiple device IDs to be supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the TensileLite build system, the PCI chip ID is added as an ``Or``-style predicate, to support multiple device IDs
```

Author: Another similar comment on capitalization on tensilelite

for the same device.

> At build, when the predicates are written to the master solution libraries, chip ID predicates are added as ``Or`` style conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At build time, when the predicates are written to the master solution libraries, chip ID predicates are added as ``Or``-style conditions
```

to the top-level lazy lookup (``TensileLibrary_lazy_....dat/yaml``). For example, a snippet from ``TensileLibrary_lazy_gfx1201.yaml``
could appear as:

.. code-block:: yaml

    predicate:
      type: AMDGPU                              # <-- AMDGPU hardware predicate
      value:
        type: And
        value:
        - {type: Processor, value: gfx1201}
        - {type: CUCount, value: 64}
        # if only one chip ID is specified
        - {type: PciChipId, value: 30032}       # <-- placed directly alongside Process
        
        # if multiple chip IDs are specified
        - type: Or                              # <-- expanded into an `Or` conditioned list
          value:
          - {type: PciChipId, value: 30032}
          - {type: PciChipId, value: 30583}

> That is, groups of solutions are co-resident in a LL file and marked by a set of `Device xxxx` strings. This allows solution filtering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is, groups of solutions are co-resident in a LL file and marked by a set of ``Device xxxx`` strings. This allows solution filtering
```

(predicate matching) to be performed at the lazy library level. Consequentially, any candidate libraries that don't at least match the
processor and the current PCI chip ID (plus optional CU counts) will be skipped before the runtime code tries to load the library.

> **Using Hardware Predicates**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using hardware predicates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Reviewer: See above. Optional.

How does this play out during runtime? When the lazy solution library is loaded, it is deserialized and the predicates are matched
against the known program constraints to determine which *loadable* libraries are relevant (match), and which are not (don't match).
By setting TENSILE_DB, we can see how the chip IDs are being matched at runtime, for example, take the output from a test lib logic

> that has the gfx1201 chip ID (7550) and another, random one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set ``TENSILE_DB`` to see how the chip IDs are matched at runtime. For example, take the output from a test library logic
that has the gfx1201 chip ID (7550) and another, random one:
```

.. code-block:: text

    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    PREDICATE: ExactLogic: Hardware
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [!!]  And                           (3 predicates)
    [OK]    Processor                   gpu=gfx950:sramecc+:xnack- == sol=gfx950
    [!!]    CUCount                     gpu=256 == sol=64
    [OK]    Or                          (2 predicates)
    [OK]      PciChipId                 [AMD Instinct MI355X] gpu=0x75a3 == sol=0x75a3
    [!!]      PciChipId                 [AMD Instinct MI355X] gpu=0x75a3 == sol=0x75a2
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Result: NO MATCH
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Here we can see how different chip IDs are being selected against the known device properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can see how different chip IDs are being selected against the known device properties.
```

> Build-Time Row Ordering (Fallback-Aware)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build-time row ordering (fallback-aware)
```

----------------------------------------

> When a logic file declares multiple device IDs, ``tensilelite`` treats them as a **set**

Reviewer: Probably don't need to bold set here.

for ordering purposes (not "first ID wins"). This matters because runtime selection is
``first-match-wins``, and ``PciChipId`` supports one-way fallback.

Fallback graph (example for ``gfx950`` variants):

.. code-block:: text

    75a3  ---> 75a0
    75a2  ---> 75a0

Interpretation:

- Arrow direction means "may fallback to".
- Source-like IDs (left) are more specific than fallback targets (right).
- Rows must be ordered so source-like exact rows are considered first.

The build-time comparator for hardware rows applies chip-ID precedence as follows:

#. **Chip-set present vs absent**: rows with chip IDs sort before rows without chip IDs.
#. **Exactness first**: smaller chip-ID sets sort first (for example,
   ``{75a3}`` before ``{75a3,75a0}``).
#. **Fallback-aware rank**: for equal-size sets, compare IDs by fallback-topology rank
   (farther from fallback roots first), then by chip ID value for deterministic tie-breaks.

> #. **Then CU count**: if chip precedence does not decide order, higher ``CUCount`` sorts first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. **The CU count**: if chip precedence does not decide the order, the higher ``CUCount`` sorts first.
```

Minimal ordering example (same processor):

.. code-block:: text

    1) {75a3}, CU=256
    2) {75a3}, CU=64
    3) {75a0}, CU=256
    4) {75a0}, CU=64
    5) {75a3,75a0}, CU=*
    6) {no chip id}, CU=*

Why this matters:

- Device ``75a3`` can still use ``75a0`` fallback kernels at runtime.

> - But exact ``75a3`` rows are evaluated first, preventing broad/mixed rows from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- However, exact ``75a3`` rows are evaluated first, preventing broad/mixed rows from
```

  accidentally shadowing more specific rows.

> Runtime Selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runtime selection
```

-----------------

``ExactLogicLibrary::findBestSolution`` iterates hardware predicate rows in priority order. 
For each row that matches the GPU, it calls ``HardwarePredicate::isFallbackMatch(hardware)``
to classify the match:

- Exact match (``isFallbackMatch`` returns false): The row's ``PciChipIdEqual`` target

>   matches the GPU's chip ID exactly (e.g., mi350 GPU matching a ``PciChipIdEqual(0x75a0)`` row),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  matches the GPU's chip ID exactly (for example, an Instinct™ MI350 GPU matches a ``PciChipIdEqual(0x75a0)`` row),
```

Author: Above you removed "for example" with "e.g." styling, which is preferred?

  or the row has no chip ID predicate at all. The solution is returned immediately.
- Fallback match (``isFallbackMatch`` returns true): The GPU matched via chip ID fallback 

>   (e.g., mi355 0x75a3 matching an mi350 0x75a0 row through ``ChipIdRegistry``). The solution is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (for example, an Instinct MI355 GPU ``0x75a3`` matches an Instinct MI350 GPU ``0x75a0`` row through ``ChipIdRegistry``). The solution is
```

Author: Same as above, "for example" vs "e.g."

Author: Also "Instinct" here doesn't have the TM superscript

>   saved but the loop continues searching for an exact match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  saved but the loop continues to search for an exact match.
```

After all rows are checked, if no exact match was found, the saved fallback solution is returned.
This ensures that device-specific solutions (mi355-targeted kernels) are always preferred over 

> fallback solutions (mi350 kernels running on mi355), regardless of row ordering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that device-specific solutions (Instinct MI355-targeted kernels) are always preferred over 
fallback solutions (Instinct MI350 kernels running on an Instinct MI355 GPU), regardless of row ordering.
```

Author: Is TM superscript needed on all cases of "Instinct"?
